In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet
hole, filled with the ends of worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry,
bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a
hobbit-hole, and that means comfort.

It had a perfectly round door like a porthole, painted green, with a
shiny yellow brass knob in the exact middle. The door opened on
to a tube-shaped hall like a tunnel: a very comfortable tunnel
without smoke, with panelled walls, and floors tiled and carpeted,
provided with polished chairs, and lots and lots of pegs for hats
and coats - the hobbit was fond of visitors. The tunnel wound on
and on, going fairly but not quite straight into the side of the hill -
The Hill, as all the people for many miles round called it - and many
little round doors opened out of it, first on one side and then on
another. No going upstairs for the hobbit: bedrooms, bathrooms,
cellars, pantries (lots of these), wardrobes (he had whole rooms
devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining rooms, all were on the same
floor, and indeed on the same passage. The best rooms were all
on the left-hand side (going in), for these were the only ones to
have windows, deep-set round windows looking over his garden
and meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.

This hobbit was a very well-to-do hobbit, and his name was
Baggins. The Bagginses had lived in the neighbourhood of The Hill
for time out of mind, and people considered them very
respectable, not only because most of them were rich, but also
because they never had any adventures or did anything
unexpected: you could tell what a Baggins would say on any
question without the bother of asking him. This is a story of how a
Baggins had an adventure, found himself doing and saying things
altogether unexpected. He may have lost the neighbours' respect,
but he gained-well, you will see whether he gained anything in the
end.

The mother of our particular hobbit … what is a hobbit? I suppose
hobbits need some description nowadays, since they have
become rare and shy of the Big People, as they call us. They are
(or were) a little people, about half our height, and smaller than the
bearded Dwarves. Hobbits have no beards. There is little or no
magic about them, except the ordinary everyday sort which helps
them to disappear quietly and quickly when large stupid folk like
you and me come blundering along, making a noise like elephants
which they can hear a mile off. They are inclined to be fat in the
stomach; they dress in bright colours (chiefly green and yellow);
wear no shoes, because their feet grow natural leathery soles and
thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which is curly);
have long clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh
deep fruity laughs (especially after dinner, which they have twice a
day when they can get it). Now you know enough to go on with. As I
was saying, the mother of this hobbit - of Bilbo Baggins, that is -
was the fabulous Belladonna Took, one of the three remarkable
daughters of the Old Took, head of the hobbits who lived across
The Water, the small river that ran at the foot of The Hill. It was
often said (in other families) that long ago one of the Took
ancestors must have taken a fairy wife. That was, of course,
absurd, but certainly there was still something not entirely hobbit-
like about them, - and once in a while members of the Took-clan
would go and have adventures. They discreetly disappeared, and
the family hushed it up; but the fact remained that the Tooks were
not as respectable as the Bagginses, though they were
undoubtedly richer. Not that Belladonna Took ever had any
adventures after she became Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, that
was Bilbo's father, built the most luxurious hobbit-hole for her (and
partly with her money) that was to be found either under The Hill or
over The Hill or across The Water, and there they remained to the
end of their days. Still it is probable that Bilbo, her only son,
although he looked and behaved exactly like a second edition of
his solid and comfortable father, got something a bit queer in his
makeup from the Took side, something that only waited for a
chance to come out. The chance never arrived, until Bilbo Baggins
was grown up, being about fifty years old or so, and living in the
beautiful hobbit-hole built by his father, which I have just described
for you, until he had in fact apparently settled down immovably.

By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the
world, when there was less noise and more green, and the hobbits
were still numerous and prosperous, and Bilbo Baggins was
standing at his door after breakfast smoking an enormous long
wooden pipe that reached nearly down to his woolly toes (neatly
brushed) - Gandalf came by. Gandalf! If you had heard only a
quarter of what I have heard about him, and I have only heard very
little of all there is to hear, you would be prepared for any sort I of
remarkable tale. Tales and adventures sprouted up all over the
place wherever he went, in the most extraordinary fashion. He had
not been down that way under The Hill for ages and ages, not
since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had
almost forgotten what he looked like. He had been away over The
Hill and across The Water on business of his own since they were
all small hobbit-boys and hobbit-girls.

All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was an old man
with a staff. He had a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a
silver scarf over which a white beard hung down below his waist,
and immense black boots.

"Good morning!" said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun was shining,
and the grass was very green. But Gandalf looked at him from
under long bushy eyebrows that stuck out further than the brim of
his shady hat. "What do you mean?" he said. "Do you wish me a
good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I want
not; or that you feel good this morning; or that it is morning to be
good on?"

"All of them at once," said Bilbo. "And a very fine morning for a
pipe of tobacco out of doors, into the bargain. If you have a pipe
about you, sit down and have a fill of mine! There's no hurry, we
have all the day before us!" Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his
door, crossed his legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring of smoke
that sailed up into the air without breaking and floated away over
The Hill.

"Very pretty!" said Gandalf. "But I have no time to blow smoke-
rings this morning. I am looking for someone to share in an
adventure that I am arranging, and it's very difficult to find anyone."

"I should think so - in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have
no use for adventures. Nasty, disturbing uncomfortable things!
Make you late for dinner! I can’t think what anybody sees in them"
said our Mr. Baggins, and stuck one thumb behind his braces, and
blew out another even bigger smoke-ring. Then he took out his
morning letters, and began to read, pretending to take no more
notice of the old man. He had decided that he was not quite his
sort, and wanted him to go away. But the old man did not move. He
stood leaning on his stick and gazing at the hobbit without saying
anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even a little cross.

"Good morning!" he said at last. "We don't want any adventures
here, thank you! You might try over The Hill or across The Water."
By this he meant that the conversation was at an end.

"What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!" said Gandalf.
"Now you mean that you want to get rid of me, and that it won't be
good till I move off."

"Not at all, not at all, my dear sir! Let me see, I don't think I know
your name?"

"Yes, yes, my dear sir - and I do know your name, Mr. Bilbo
Baggins. And you do know my name, though you don't remember
that I belong to it. I am Gandalf, and Gandalf means me! To think
that I should have lived to be good-morninged by Belladonna
Took's son, as if I was selling buttons at the door!"

"Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the wandering wizard
that gave Old Took a pair of magic diamond studs that fastened
themselves and never came undone till ordered? Not the fellow
who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and
goblins and giants and the rescue of princesses and the
unexpected luck of widows' sons? Not the man that used to make
such particularly excellent fireworks! I remember those! Old Took
used to have them on Midsummer's Eve. Splendid! They used to
go up like great lilies and snapdragons and laburnums of fire and
hang in the twilight all evening!" You will notice already that Mr.
Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also that he
was very fond of flowers. "Dear me!" he went on. "Not the Gandalf
who was responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off
into the Blue for mad adventures. Anything from climbing trees to
visiting Elves - or sailing in ships, sailing to other shores! Bless me,
life used to be quite inter - I mean, you used to upset things badly
in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no
idea you were still in business."

"Where else should I be?" said the wizard. "All the same I am
pleased to find you remember something about me. You seem to
remember my fireworks kindly, at any rate, land that is not without
hope. Indeed for your old grand-father Took's sake, and for the
sake of poor Belladonna, I will give you what you asked for."

"I beg your pardon, I haven't asked for anything!"

"Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go
so far as to send you on this adventure. Very amusing for me, very
good for you and profitable too, very likely, if you ever get over it."

"Sorry! I don't want any adventures, thank you. Not today. Good
morning! But please come to tea - any time you like! Why not
tomorrow? Come tomorrow! Good-bye!"

With that the hobbit turned and scuttled inside his round green
door, and shut it as quickly as he dared, not to seem rude. Wizards
after all are wizards.

"What on earth did I ask him to tea for!" he said to himself, as he
went to the pantry. He had only just had breakfast, but he thought a
cake or two and a drink of something would do him good after his
fright. Gandalf in the meantime was still standing outside the door,
and laughing long but quietly. After a while he stepped up, and with
the spike of his staff scratched a queer sign on the hobbit's
beautiful green front door. Then he strode away, just about the time
when Bilbo was finishing his second cake and beginning to think
that he had escape adventures very well.